---
layout: paper
title: Visualization Paradigms in the Renewable Energy Space
order: 2019-1
authors: K. Gruchalla, H. Sky, N. Gilroy, M. Queen, X. Pu
pubdate: October 21, 2019
location: Vancouver, Canada
image: /images/vis2019.png
image_text: EnergyVis 2021
link: "http://ieeevis.org/year/2019/info/application-spotlights#-visualization-paradigms-in-the-renewable-energy-space"
links:
type: 'event'
---
[IEEE VisWeek](http://ieeevis.org/year/2019/welcome) Application Spotlight. Visualization is commonly used in the renewable energy space, not only by analysts, but also for communication to policymakers, city planners, and the general public. The scope and style of these visualizations vary based on the data and end goals. At the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 3D immersive visualization is a prominent method for exploring spatially complex data, such as the morphology of photovoltaic materials. However, this paradigm is not appropriate for many techno-economic studies, such as investigating where to put new wind farms or the cost of adding new batteries to the power grid. In these cases, visualizations tend to be more map-based and deployed as web or desktop applications and on large scale 2D displays. While the types and data and targeted audience within this space is broad, there are some overarching themes including the relationship between cost, energy capacity, and economic and regulatory policy. These themes make both the science and visualization more complicated, forcing simulations to integrate energy engineering with policy and economics and to visualize multitudes of scenarios simultaneously. In this spotlight, we will give a primer to the varied types of energy technologies within this space as well as common visualization strategies for these types. We will then dive into 4-5 lightning talks on visualization systems that are pushing state of the art and changing how renewable energy is created, deployed and utilized.

