---
layout: paper
title: Computational assessment of the effect of realistic intraparticle geometry on biomass heating rates and pyrolysis yields
authors: R.W. Grout, K. Malhorta, P. Ciesielski,  K. Gruchalla, B. Donohoe, M. Nimols
journal: In Proceedings of 8th US National Combustion Meeting
order: 2013-1
pubdate: May 2013
image: /images/char_thumb.png
image_text: Temperature and Char mass concentration during conversion and after all wood is converted.
links:
 - path: "https://sutherland.che.utah.edu/USCI2013/PAPERS/1B16-070CO-0341.pdf"
   title: paper
 - path: "bib/grout_combustion_2013.bib"
   title: bibtex
---
The coupled heat transfer and chemical kinetics processes inside of a pyrolyzing biomass particle are simulated with realistic intra-particle geometry to investigate the effects of the cellular structure on char yields. Although the technology exists for deriving liquid fuels from biomass via pyrolysis oil, it is not currently cost-effective relative to competing fuel streams. DOE EERE’s multi-year program plan articulates a goal to bring the estimated mature technology cost to produce gasoline and diesel blendstocks via thermochemical pathways down to $1.56 per gallon of total blendstock by 2017; decreasing the char residual during primary pyrolysis is a key improvement necessary to meet that goal. It is generally agreed that the residual char fraction is strongly dependent on the biomass heating rate; what is not well understood is the role of the biomass cellular structure on the localized heating rates and kinetics within a biomass particle. An unstructured finite-element analysis tool (DKSOLVE) is built upon FEniCS—an open source collection of tools for automating the solution of differential equations — to treat the diffusive transport and Cantera handle the pyrolysis reactions. Whereas previous attempts to account for intra-particle variation have considered only relatively simplistic geometries (e.g., radially symmetric cylinders and spheres) with low dimensional techniques, here full three-dimensional unstructured meshes are used to treat realistic geometries. Canonical geometries are created that typify key characteristics observed from experimental measurements. In this initial study, a lumped chemistry model for the primary pyrolysis kinetics is used to first validate the new code and computational techniques through comparison to earlier works considering spherical particles, followed by application to the complex geometry cases. It is found that the variations in heat transfer coefficients between the cell walls and lumen can lead to locally enhanced/degraded heating rates relative to a uniform particle and a corresponding non-uniformity in the residual composition. The foundation is formed for further work to examine the effects of secondary reactions occurring in pyrolysis gasses before they escape the biomass particle and to search for geometric modifications that improve yields and are achievable through practical pretreatments.