---
layout: paper
title: Visualizations of direct fuel injection effects in a supersonic cavity flameholder
authors: H. Sitaraman, N. Brunhart-Lupo, M. Henry de Frahan, S. Yellapantula, B. Perry, J. Rood, R. Grout, M. Day, R. Binyahib, and K. Gruchalla
journal: "Physical Review Fluids"
order: 2021-05
pubdate: November 2021
award: APS Gallery of Fluid Motion Award 
image: /images/fig_aps.png
image_text: temperature snapshot at statistical steady-state for two fuel injection cases
links:
- path: "https://journals.aps.org/prfluids/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevFluids.6.110504"
  title: paper
- path: "bib/sitaraman_6.110504.bib" 
  title: bibtex
- path: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m8f9D0MCs1s
  title: video
---
Supersonic  combustion has received considerable interest in recent years due to emphasis on hypersonic vehicle development, reusable launch systems and air-breathing rocket engines.  Combustion and flame stabilization at high supersonic flows is challenging mainly because of extremely small residence times for fuel-oxidizer mixing  and  ignition.   Cavity-based  flameholders  are  available technique for providing flame-stabilization in these applications.  The cavity geometry enables flow deceleration and recirculation thus increasing the residence time for adequate mixing and combustion.  Flameholderbehavior varies based on whether fuel is injected upstream of or within the cavity, with both general strategies having been explored in laboratory-scale systems.  Injectionupstream of the cavity is a practical solution that provides fuel for flameholding and main engine combustion, but may require high fueling rates for greater mixing within the recirculation zone.  Direct fuel injection within the cavity on the other hand provides greater control of local stoichiometry and fuel residence times; however, a theoretical understanding of how turbulent mixing between the  fuel  jet  and  air  stream  influences  combustion  has not yet been fully developed.  The main contribution of this work is to address these interactions via high-fidelity combustion simulations.  Our simulations, along with the help of cutting-edge visualization, provide deeper insights on fuel-jet shear-layer interactions within a cavity flame-holder when the injection location is varied, which in turn will enable optimized direct fuel injection strategies.


